---
title: Did Science Start in 17th Century Europe?
category: [hps]
tags: []
---

Science today, both the social practice and its associated ‘body of knowledge’,
has a plethora of features. Distinguishing which of these are peculiarities of
today, others are historical artifacts, and yet others are constitutive. In
this essay, we will attempt to come to a definition of science by arriving at
its constitutive features, while observing what this definition tells us about
the historical origin of science. We must be careful not to let our
preconceived notion of science’s historical origin motivate our definitions of
science. One of these preconceptions is to place modern science’s origins in
17th century Europe. In this essay, we will mainly focus on the issues with
this claim.  Alfred Rupert Hall has called the intellectual events which
occurred in the 16th and 17th centuries “an a priori redefinition of the
objects of philosophical and scientific inquiry” (A Rupert Hall). Is this a
fair assessment? Let us sketch the intellectual achievements rightly credited
to 17th century Europe. According to Steven Shapin, the scientific revolution
pushed the following three ideas into mainstream European scientific thought[^1].
First, that the laws governing the artificial are identical to the ones
governing the natural. This change in perspective erased the Aristotelian
distinction between human creation and nature – erasing any doubts about our
potential to understand nature (typical under Christian teachings, which insist
on the fallibility of the human senses), as well as increasing people’s
optimism about the potentiality of human artifice. Second, that these laws are
mechanistic in nature. That is, they describe nature in terms of passive matter
subjected to physical forces manifesting themselves through touch, as opposed
to active matter which seeks to actualize its potentiality or telos. Third,
that the laws governing the heavens were the same as the ones governing the
earth. Galileo argued this for the first time in his Almagest, following his
observations of the moons of Jupiter, sunspots, and the lunar mountains.
Descartes and Leibniz came up with their treatises attempting to explain the
entire universe using simple laws, and their project was masterfully completed
when Newton published Principia. These three changes in thinking are often
thought of together as the mechanization of nature.  To sum up, for the first
time in history, the laws governing the natural world were thought to be
mechanistic and universal.  If mechanism and universality are constitutive
features of science, then science starts in the 17th century. However, there
are problems with making mechanism so central to scientific thought, because
the mechanism defended by 17th mechanical philosophers was steeped in dogma and
would not be accepted in the scientific community today. Indeed, the dogmatic
obsession which mechanistic philosophers had with mechanism was the reason for
many attacks on Newton’s Principia – gravity was seen as an occult force, and a
return to the more primitive, Aristotelian, teleological worldview (where
bodies ‘seek’ each other in a rather anthropomorphic fashion).  Since the 1930s
Physics has moved beyond the realm of mechanism, at least where determinism is
concerned. In quantum mechanics and Hamiltonian mechanics, we have reinstated
telos, albeit in a less poetic fashion as in the Aristotelian sense. Particles
will move not by being “subjected” to forces passively, but by acting to
minimizing a quantity called the action. Consensus among physicists today is
that there is a priori no advantage over a teleological explanation versus a
mechanistic one. Hence, the (re)appearance of teleology in 1930s physics was a
shift in our way of thinking of nature, and not the destruction of science.
Mechanism fell, but science remained standing. Hence, mechanism can’t be a
constitutive feature.  While mechanical philosophy is not a good constitutive
feature of science, the crisis of intelligibility of physics in the early 20th
can reveal what was. The UV catastrophe and the photoelectric effect are
examples of phenomena which refused to be explained using the existing
(mechanistic) explanatory apparatus. Imagine if, faced with the photo-electric
effect and the strange explanations provided by Lorentz, Einstein, and Planck,
the scientific community never accepted their explanations in order to save
mechanism. This would be unscientific, and it did not happen, for the most
fundamental assumption among scientists is that Nature has laws which are
(somewhat) intelligible to humans. In order to preserve this core assumption,
scientists were forced to change their notion of what counts as an intelligible
explanation – rejecting classical mechanics (and its corollary – determinism)
and adopting quantum mechanics. Indeed, this is reminiscent of what happened in
the 17th century – the mechanical philosophers championed one kind of
intelligibility (mechanistic, deterministic) over another kind (Aristotelian,
goal-oriented) and won the battle of ideas.  We have come to our next core
constitutive feature of science: the belief that Nature follows laws which are
intelligible to humans. This belief did not originate in the 17th century. In
fact, both Plato and Aristotle made similar claims; the most famous one being’s
Aristotle principle: Nature does nothing without purpose or uselessly. The
prominence of the mechanical philosophers in the 17th century means that the
view of what counts as an intelligible explanation was redefined (and has been
redefined since). This presents us with another issue with defining the birth
of science. The contempt which 17th century scientists had for the animistic
worldview became a threat to the legacy of pre-17th century science.  Thomas
Hobbes, for example, caricatured traditional physical beliefs by making
sarcastic remarks about their animistic nature; as with the following example,
taken from Steven Shapin’s The Scientific Revolution. According to the
Ancients, bodies descended because they were heavy. “But if you ask what they
mean by heaviness, they will define it to be an endeavor to go to the centre of
the earth. So that the cause why things sink downward, is an endeavor to be
below: which is as much to say that bodies descend, or ascend, because they do…
[it is] as if stones and metals had a desire .. as man does”. Simply pointing
out the anthropomorphism of animistic thought was enough to brandish it as
unscientific. One is tempted to wonder what Hobbes would have made of Newtonian
gravity or Maxwellian Electromagnetism.  We return to the question of
pinpointing those features of modern science which are constitutive. Another
feature of modern science is that it is secular – it does not consider the
opinions of any church. Asking ‘Is secularity a constitutive feature?’ amounts
to imagining a world in which science is not secular and judging whether or not
it remains science.  Suppose that tomorrow astronomers found a written message
from the Christian God in Latin, sprawled across the Dragonfish Nebula. Would
this spell the end of science? Would scientists give up their attempts to study
and explain nature? I argue that they would not. The ‘body of knowledge’
associated with science would not change (science makes no truth claims about
the existence of God). Scientists would still run experiments and would still
expect the same thing to happen whether an experiment is run yesterday, today
or tomorrow. The discovery of God would not invalidate any current means of
acquisition of scientific knowledge, but it would expand the legitimate means
of gaining knowledge of the world – quantum physicists might start considering
the opinion of the Christian, Orthodox, or Coptic Church. It seems that
secularity is then not a constitutive feature of science - can this be right?
No! Because as soon as God is discovered by observation, He exits the realm of
faith, and enters the realm of the temporal, real, observable, and, yes -
secular. For science to cease to be secular would be exemplified by a biologist
making scientific claims about the animals which rely on faith in Jesus Christ
– and this must strike the modern reader as grossly unscientific. Hence, we are
forced to call secularism a constitutive feature. This is not to say scientists
cannot be religious, or that the problems they choose to work on cannot be
inspired by their religious worldview. But truth-claims about the natural must
not be informed by faith.  If secularism is another defining feature, where
does it place the start of science? Where can we find in the past, among people
engaged with explaining the natural world, the belief that religion should have
nothing to do with it? One place we can exclude immediately is Europe in the
early Middle Ages. The first impact of science on Christianity can be seen from
the writings of the patristic writers. They argued that a good Christian should
be mindful of his salvation, and should not penetrate further into the secrets
of Nature than Scripture would demand and allow. Tertullian, sometimes called
the father of western theology, has a famous saying: Nobis curiositate opus non
est post Jesus Christum – nihil desideramus ultra credere - For us there is no
curiosity after Jesus Christ, nor inquiry after the Gospel. The prevailing
worldview among in the European and Byzantine world was that the secular
pursuit of knowledge could interfere with the holy pursuit of salvation. Hence
religion and science are placed in opposition, and somewhat in conflict. 17th
century Europe is often portrayed as pushing religion back out of the domain of
science. Hence Galileo, quoting a private conversation with Cardinal Baronius:
“The Bible teaches you how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go”, which
ascribes religion and science as coexisting but with different functions, and,
crucially, without interfering with each other.  Again, the argument is not
that 17th century scientists were agnostics. Just as there are many Muslim and
Catholic scientists today who do not let their religion inform their scientific
claims to truth, so too did 17th century natural philosophers argue that
religion belonged to a different domain. The problem with this view is that
many scientists revealed that they did not themselves believe religion and
science to be separate. For example, the creation myth was used to uphold that
most fundamental assumption in science – that the universe has rational,
knowable laws. Kepler held that Nature obeys natural laws because God had used
these laws in creating nature. We see, that, in fact, the cornerstone of
science in the 17th century was held up by religion.  Seeking for other
examples of secularism in science also leads us to the Abbassid caliphate of
the 8th and 9th centuries, centred around Baghdad. A period of great
intellectual achievement in which saw the recovery of lost Greek and
Alexandrian mathematics, astronomy, and physics. The Caliph Al Mamun is known
to have encouraged learning among his subjects, sponsoring scientific missions
such as one to measure the circumference of the earth. In apocryphal story, Al
Mamun meets Aristotle in a dream, in which he asks him “what is good?”.
Aristotle answers “that which is good in the mind”. Upon asking “what else?”,
Aristotle responds “That which is good in the law”. It is not the mind which is
controlled by religion, as with the patristic writers mentioned earlier, but
exactly the other way around. Crucially placing “the mind” before “the law”
suggests that the mind (or science) is the arbiter of all knowledge, even
religious knowledge. This points to a certain secularism in establishing
knowledge about the natural world, and hence a constitutive feature of science.
In conclusion, we have found that the constitutive features of science are 1)
The conviction that nature follows laws which are intelligible by humans. 2)
That these laws are universal 3) That faith should not be involved in the
gathering of information about Nature. Having arrived at these features, we
have shown the difficulties that historians run into when arguing science
begins in 17th century Europe. Mechanistic philosophy is not a constitutive
feature, and secular theorizing and gathering of data about the natural world
wasn’t unique to 17th century Europe. 

[^1]: Steven Shapin: _The Scientific Revolution_
